Now we are moving on to that list
bullet styling that I just mentioned.
So, we are on to part 2 here, ordered
an unordered list styling with pseudo
classes and
you guys open up the beginning code pen.
So, just as always, it's always good to
start anytime you take a look at any of
these learning CSS types of things.
You always want to take
a look at your HTML first and
get familiar with what it is.
I've used really super simple
HTML structures today,
so that you can easily carry them in your
head and then just concentrate on the CSS.
So here we have an unordered
list with a class of an ordered.
We have an ordered list
with a class of ordered and
we have a nested list with
a class of nested spiffy cool.
All right, so that way we can
work on three different things.
The first thing I wanna work on are-
The various types of children.
So previously we had talked
about siblings and how we could
select whether siblings are next to
each other or just generally siblings.
But there are more specific ways
we can go about selecting these.
And these are with the so-called
nth child classes.
So there's a first child, there's last
child and there's an nth child, right?
There's the oldest of the family,
there's the youngest of the family and
then there's everybody in between.
They're just n.
[LAUGH] We don't really discriminate
between the ones in the middle.
So let's go through how those might work.
So I'm going to start all of
these off with unordered,
because we're gonna use this first
list as the one to talk about this.
So unordered li, first hyphen child.
Any guess what this selector might select
before I put anything in his value?
>> First element in the first
list in the third list.
>> Okay?
So it's going to select
which one of these, Ben.
>> Here's the thing, the first ally.
>> There's very first thing here.
Here's the thing, okay?
Sure enough if we said color red,
it will select that first bullet item.
Shockingly, right?
Guess what happens if I said last child.
>> A Lincoln nothing turns red,
>> A Lincoln a thing turns red.
>> The second one I should say.
>> Oops, what happened?
Can you explain that?
>> The a element, so the UL or sorry,
the Li element is
inheriting the color red.
However, the, A element that actually
makes up the content has its own color.
>> Correct.
>> Is this is what we're saying.
>> Exactly, exactly what's going on.
So Maybe you can just see there the dot is
red, but the link itself stayed blue and
that's because that blue styling comes
from our default browser style sheet.
We haven't overridden that yet
that has to do with inheritance,
we will get there later on today, okay?
So that's first child,
that's last child, and in fact,
we can just to prove to you
that this in fact works.
We could say ordered li last child and
the last child there would show up.
Okay, so
that's first child that's last child.
Those are pretty easy to understand,
then we have nth child.
Nth child, okay, so
nth child starts off pretty simple.
So we can put in any number
directly inside of nth child,
so I can say, nth child six and
that will select the six list item and
make it red.
This may seem completely useless
that's what people usually tell me at
this moment in time, Jen this is
the most useless trick I've ever seen.
Why would I want to make
the sixth child red?
And I agree with you in this context but
there is a very cool trick
associated with the selector.
I'm going to show you a little
bit later on today, but
that is one thing you can do.
So just put in a number whatever number,
if that number exists,
then it will be selected.
We count like humans in CSS, so we start
with one not with zero, [LAUGH] okay?
And so if I said nth-child 1, that would
be the same thing as saying first child.
All right, so that's the easy one.
Then we have the next
one that's really easy.
We can say odd or even.
I'm getting bored with that,
let's make it a background color.
Odd or even, so
odd we'll start with the first child,.
In this case, number one and then count
by odd numbers, one, three, five,
seven, nine, etc until the end of time.
This seems much more useful, yes?
Imagined in table structures
this is a way you can
stripe your table rows very easily, okay?
Guess, what else I can
use as a key word here?
>> Prime.
>> Not prime, even.
[LAUGH] And shockingly,
that will do the opposite,
okay/ So
now we select the even number guys, right?
Very useful, very useful, you'll see
I didn't even use it all the time.
Then we get to the last
one which is just weird.
Let's say, if I said this, 3n.
3n, this starts to look like algebra,
okay?
So 3n is doing what?
>> Every third element.
>> Every third element, so one,
two, three, four, five, six.
And then I don't have a nine, so
that's as far as it gets, all right?
So three n that is what that can do and
of course,
we can then make it four n or
whatever, right?
We can continue on with that pattern.
Then the weird part comes and
the weird part is when we say
something like, plus two.
I'm pologize to all of you who
are flashing back to algebra, but
I promise you this is not algebra.
So what is this saying?
Anyone have a guess what 3n+2 would mean?
>> So the value of n is what spot in the
list we're in, and then so we'll add 2.
So, the second element is
highlighted because n is 0, and so
therefore that second one gets selected
and then we have the fifth and
the eighth, which are valid for
n equals 2.
>> Very cool, very cool and very close.
The end doesn't really mean
anything I don't think.
[LAUGH] Can't think of this as algebra.
So with the plus sign the plus two means
we're going to start with the second one.
So notice that we started there with
number two and then we're going to follow
the pattern of every third one starting
with the second item on the list.
Every third element starting with
the second one on the list, so
Dan I know you were saying this
was new for you last week.
>> So isn't this still algebra?
>> No, there is no algebra.
It looks like algebra I know,
don't try to solve it,
don't try to think of it as algebra.
I don't know why they chose
to write it this way, but
that last number there after the plus
sign tells you which child to start with,
in this case, the second child and then-
>> It'd be putting each value of,
like zero into n, 1, n 2 n and then 2 and
n and you'd get each number correct.
If you put n equals zero, you get two,
n equals one, you get five and
you're getting each one of those.
I can't stop thinking of it that way.
>> Okay.
If the math works, then then that's great,
but I think of it as the last number and
number two is where you start and then
the three n just indicates every third n.
>> Then is there a reason
it's not zero indexed?
>> As in why don't they start with zero?
>> Yeah.
>> Because it's CSS and
it's for designers and
they kind of like humans
[LAUGH] Like engineers.
All right, so with that part of info
child understood, a single number odd and
even keywords or the weird algebra
looking thing that's not algebra,
stop thinking that way.
The reverse is also true here,
we can also say nth- last- child and
last child this counts up from
the last child and assigns the styles.
So now we're counting from the bottom,
this is the second one and
then every third one from the bottom,
okay?
Likewise, we can do add in
even from the bottom up.
We can also do a regular old
number from the bottom up.
This would select the second
one from the bottom.
Make sense?
Okay, some of these feel a little bit
esoteric, and a lot of ways I think
nth child is the one that pretty
much everybody uses in programming.
But if for whatever reason counting from
the bottom is simpler this is possible.
What would happen if I put in
a minus sign here instead?
So if I go back to my nth child and
I put in a minus sign between 3n- 2.
What does that mean?
>> I'd assume it would move
the starting position, quote, unquote,
back, in determining which
items to actually highlight.
>> Okay, move the starting position back.
So, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeap, that's pretty much it.